MSC3700: Deprecate plaintext sender key (#3700)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3700-deprecate-sender-key.md

`algorithm` and `session_id` are required for clients to be able to decrypt the
ciphertext: the algorithm explains how to decrypt and the session ID says which
session to use to decrypt the ciphertext.

The `sender_key` and `device_id` are currently used by clients to store and
lookup sessions in addition to the `session_id`, however the `session_id` is
globally unique and so no disambiguation using `sender_key` or `device_id` is
needed.

Session IDs are encoded ed25519 public keys; when new sessions are shared they
will be signed by the associated private key.

## Proposal

The `sender_key` and `device_id` in `m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2` message contents are
deprecated. Clients must ignore those fields when processing events, but should
still include the fields when generating events to maintain backwards
compatibility. At a future time the fields will stop being included.

Clients must store and lookup sessions based purely on the session ID.

When updating an existing session key, clients must ensure:
1. that the updated session data comes from a trusted source, e.g. either the
   session data has a) a valid signature, or b) comes from the user’s session

>    key backup; and

Author: We should spell out what we mean by "trusted source" here

# MSC3700: Deprecate plaintext sender_key

This MSC proposes to deprecate superfluous fields from the plaintext event
content of encrypted events, increasing privacy and enhancing security.

An encrypted message that uses an algorithm of `m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2` (such as
an `m.room.encrypted` event) contains the following plain text keys in its
contents: `algorithm`, `session_id`, `sender_key` and `device_id`. Both the
`algorithm` and `session_id` are required for clients to be able to decrypt the
ciphertext: the algorithm explains how to decrypt and the session ID says which
session to use to decrypt the ciphertext.

The `sender_key` and `device_id` are currently used by clients to store and
lookup sessions in addition to the `session_id`, however the `session_id` is
globally unique and so no disambiguation using `sender_key` or `device_id` is
needed.

> Session IDs are encoded ed25519 public keys; when new sessions are shared they
> will be signed by the associated private key.

Reviewer: > when new sessions are shared they will be signed by the associated private key.

Is this a statement of current fact? It's not entirely clear.

I think you mean:

```suggestion
Session IDs are encoded ed25519 public keys. In particular, the session ID is the
public part of the key used to sign the session when it is shared.
```

# MSC3700: Deprecate plaintext sender_key

This MSC proposes to deprecate superfluous fields from the plaintext event
content of encrypted events, increasing privacy and enhancing security.

An encrypted message that uses an algorithm of
[`m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#mmegolmv1aes-sha2)
(such as an `m.room.encrypted` event) contains the following plain text keys in
its contents: `algorithm`, `session_id`, `sender_key` and `device_id`. Both the
`algorithm` and `session_id` are required for clients to be able to decrypt the
ciphertext: the algorithm explains how to decrypt and the session ID says which
session to use to decrypt the ciphertext.

The `sender_key` and `device_id` are currently used by clients to store and
lookup sessions in addition to the `session_id`, however the `session_id` is
globally unique and so no disambiguation using `sender_key` or `device_id` is

> needed.

Reviewer 2: FWIW, the key backup API already only indexes by room ID and session ID, so we already have an assumption that sender key/device ID are not necessary to ensure uniqueness.

Session IDs are encoded ed25519 public keys. In particular, the session ID is
the public part of the key used to sign the session when it is shared.

## Proposal

The `sender_key` and `device_id` in `m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2` message contents are
deprecated. Clients must ignore those fields when processing events, but should
still include the fields when generating events to maintain backwards

> compatibility. At a future time the fields will stop being included.

Reviewer 3: What timeframe are we approximately dealing with here? 6 months? A year?

Author: Realistically the latter. I hope we would be able to do it within a year, but in a lot of ways it depends on how fast the ecosystem moves to adopt it.

Reviewer 3: Okay, that sounds reasonable. I should be able to adapt my clients quite fast, but actually getting a release out is something I sometimes struggle with (and getting that out to distros). Thanks!

Similarly, the `sender_key` field in `m.room_key_request` to-device messages is
deprecated. Clients must ignore the field when processing the request, but
should still include it when generating *if* there is a `sender_key` field in
the event we're requesting keys for.

> Clients must store and lookup sessions based purely on the session ID.

Reviewer 2: This makes it sound like clients are not allowed to store sessions based on room ID or sender user ID, which I don't think is what is intended.

Author: Hmm, that is an interesting question actually. I think we don't want clients to ever lookup *inbound* sessions based on room ID or sender user ID, as they can be faked in exactly the same way as `sender_key` and `device_id`. Though I guess clients need to explicitly check that the sender user and room matches the session? I can make that more explicit.

Author: > At least for room ID, it's hard to fake since the event itself is tied to the room.

The server could easily lie about the room ID for an event though. If we don't check the room ID matches the session room ID then it allows servers to forward encrypted events into other rooms.

---

I've updated the language to:

>Clients must not store or lookup sessions using the sender key or device ID.
>
>Client must continue to ensure that the event's sender and room ID fields match
those of the looked up session, e.g. by storing and looking up session using the
room ID and sender as well as the session ID.

Reviewer 4: > The server could easily lie about the room ID for an event though. If we don't check the room ID matches the session room ID then it allows servers to forward encrypted events into other rooms.

It can't, the room ID is part of the encrypted payload as well[[1]].

[1]: https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/#mmegolmv1aes-sha2

Author: Hmm, so there are *three* places where we have a room ID? The event, the session and the encrypted payload? Presumably we still want to check that they all match?

Reviewer 4: Well, the event room id is a hint to find the right bucket, the session room id is just a hint into which bucket to put the session. The room id on the session also can't be replaced by the server.

The encrypted payload room id ensures that the server doesn't lie about the room id.

Author: > Well, the event room id is a hint to find the right bucket, the session room id is just a hint into which bucket to put the session. The room id on the session also can't be replaced by the server.

Sure, but that relies on the client actually verifying the room IDs match. This can be done as you say by storing the sessions under the room ID they correspond to and then looking the session up via the room ID.

However, there is a risk here that clients will do the following:
1. Look up sessions solely via session ID.
2. Not check the room ID in the encrypted payload
3. Display the message in the room corresponding to the event's room ID.

At that point the client is vulnerable to the server lying about the event's room ID and making the client display the verified encrypted content into the wrong room.

A similar attack can happen with the sender.

The key issue here is that clients need to handle both encrypted and unecrypted events, so they're very likely to use the event's room ID and sender when rendering things in the UI, rather than any data in the encrypted payload or session. This makes it very important for clients to actually check that the user ID/senders and room IDs match.

Reviewer 5: > This makes it very important for clients to actually check that the user ID/senders and room IDs match.

Agreed. But what can we do to make this more prominent? The spec has [some vague wording](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#events-8) on this for room IDs:

> We include the room ID in the payload, because otherwise the homeserver would be able to change the room a message was sent in.

There is also this bogus paragraph:

> As with Olm events, clients must confirm that the `sender_key` belongs to the user who sent the message. The same reasoning applies, but the sender ed25519 key has to be inferred from the `keys.ed25519` property of the event which established the Megolm session.

This seems like a description of exactly what *not* to do. Clients should *not* look at `sender_key` as the server can easily spoof that (and is what's now being removed!). Instead, clients should *record* the (Curve25519) identity key and (Ed25519) fingerprint keys of the Olm device that initially shared a particular Megolm session.

***

I guess we need clear, *actionable* steps of what to do upon an encrypted room message receipt. Something like:

> Upon receipt of an encrypted room message, do the following:
>
> 1. Record (Curve25519) identity key and (Ed25519) fingerprint keys of the Olm device that initially sends the `m.room_key` for a particular message.
> 2. Check that the `m.room.encrypted` event's room ID matches the `room_id` field in the encrypted plaintext of the message. If not, fail.
> ...
>
> If any of the above checks fail, the client *must not* display the message as a normal message. The client may display the message with a clear indication that it violates a required security property.

Ideally these rules would be in a differently coloured box to make it stand out from the rest of the text.

lookup sessions in addition to the `session_id`, however the `session_id` is
globally unique and so no disambiguation using `sender_key` or `device_id` is
needed.

Session IDs are encoded ed25519 public keys. In particular, the session ID is
the public part of the key used to sign the session when it is shared.

## Proposal

The `sender_key` and `device_id` in `m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2` message contents are
deprecated. Clients must ignore those fields when processing events, but should
still include the fields when generating events to maintain backwards
compatibility. At a future time the fields will stop being included.

Similarly, the `sender_key` field in `m.room_key_request` to-device messages is
deprecated. Clients must ignore the field when processing the request, but
should still include it when generating *if* there is a `sender_key` field in
the event we're requesting keys for.

Clients must not store or lookup sessions using the sender key or device ID.

Client must continue to ensure that the event's sender and room ID fields match
those of the looked up session, e.g. by storing and looking up session using the

> room ID and sender as well as the session ID.

Reviewer 3: How can a client verify that the sender matches? This is stored in none of the key exports/backups/forwards.

Author: Ah, turns out backup/forwarded keys are considered less trusted atm. We need to go and add the claimed sender to them
